=pod

=encoding utf-8

=head1 NAME

Path::Tiny - File path utility

=head1 VERSION

version 0.028

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  use Path::Tiny;

  # creating Path::Tiny objects

  $dir = path("/tmp");
  $foo = path("foo.txt");

  $subdir = $dir->child("foo");
  $bar = $subdir->child("bar.txt");

  # stringifies as cleaned up path

  $file = path("./foo.txt");
  print $file; # "foo.txt"

  # reading files

  $guts = $file->slurp;
  $guts = $file->slurp_utf8;

  @lines = $file->lines;
  @lines = $file->lines_utf8;

  $head = $file->lines( {count => 1} );

  # writing files

  $bar->spew( @data );
  $bar->spew_utf8( @data );

  # reading directories

  for ( $dir->children ) { ... }

  $iter = $dir->iterator;
  while ( my $next = $iter->() ) { ... }

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This module attempts to provide a small, fast utility for working with
file paths.  It is friendlier to use than L<File::Spec> and provides
easy access to functions from several other core file handling modules.

It doesn't attempt to be as full-featured as L<IO::All> or L<Path::Class>,
nor does it try to work for anything except Unix-like and Win32 platforms.
Even then, it might break if you try something particularly obscure or
tortuous.  (Quick!  What does this mean: C<< ///../../..//./././a//b/.././c/././ >>?
And how does it differ on Win32?)

All paths are forced to have Unix-style forward slashes.  Stringifying
the object gives you back the path (after some clean up).

File input/output methods C<flock> handles before reading or writing,
as appropriate.

The C<*_utf8> methods (C<slurp_utf8>, C<lines_utf8>, etc.) operate in raw
mode without CRLF translation.  Installing L<Unicode::UTF8> 0.58 or later
will speed up several of them and is highly recommended.

It uses L<autodie> internally, so most failures will be thrown as exceptions.

=head1 CONSTRUCTORS

=head2 path

    $path = path("foo/bar");
    $path = path("/tmp", "file.txt"); # list
    $path = path(".");                # cwd
    $path = path("~user/file.txt");   # tilde processing

Constructs a C<Path::Tiny> object.  It doesn't matter if you give a file or
directory path.  It's still up to you to call directory-like methods only on
directories and file-like methods only on files.  This function is exported
automatically by default.

The first argument must be defined and have non-zero length or an exception
will be thrown.  This prevents subtle, dangerous errors with code like
C<< path( maybe_undef() )->remove_tree >>.

If the first component of the path is a tilde ('~') then the component will be
replaced with the output of C<glob('~')>.  If the first component of the path
is a tilde followed by a user name then the component will be replaced with
output of C<glob('~username')>.  Behaviour for non-existent users depends on
the output of C<glob> on the system.

=head2 new

    $path = Path::Tiny->new("foo/bar");

This is just like C<path>, but with method call overhead.  (Why would you
do that?)

=head2 cwd

    $path = Path::Tiny->cwd; # path( Cwd::getcwd )
    $path = cwd; # optional export

Gives you the absolute path to the current directory as a C<Path::Tiny> object.
This is slightly faster than C<< path(".")->absolute >>.

C<cwd> may be exported on request and used as a function instead of as a
method.

=head2 rootdir

    $path = Path::Tiny->rootdir; # /
    $path = rootdir;             # optional export 

Gives you C<< File::Spec->rootdir >> as a C<Path::Tiny> object if you're too
picky for C<path("/")>.

C<rootdir> may be exported on request and used as a function instead of as a
method.

=head2 tempfile, tempdir

    $temp = Path::Tiny->tempfile( @options );
    $temp = Path::Tiny->tempdir( @options );
    $temp = tempfile( @options ); # optional export
    $temp = tempdir( @options );  # optional export

C<tempfile> passes the options to C<< File::Temp->new >> and returns a C<Path::Tiny>
object with the file name.  The C<TMPDIR> option is enabled by default.

The resulting C<File::Temp> object is cached. When the C<Path::Tiny> object is
destroyed, the C<File::Temp> object will be as well.

C<File::Temp> annoyingly requires you to specify a custom template in slightly
different ways depending on which function or method you call, but
C<Path::Tiny> lets you ignore that and can take either a leading template or a
C<TEMPLATE> option and does the right thing.

    $temp = Path::Tiny->tempfile( "customXXXXXXXX" );             # ok
    $temp = Path::Tiny->tempfile( TEMPLATE => "customXXXXXXXX" ); # ok

The tempfile path object will normalized to have an absolute path, even if
created in a relative directory using C<DIR>.

C<tempdir> is just like C<tempfile>, except it calls
C<< File::Temp->newdir >> instead.

Both C<tempfile> and C<tempdir> may be exported on request and used as
functions instead of as methods.

=head1 METHODS

=head2 absolute

    $abs = path("foo/bar")->absolute;
    $abs = path("foo/bar")->absolute("/tmp");

Returns a new C<Path::Tiny> object with an absolute path.  Unless
an argument is given, the current directory is used as the absolute base path.
The argument must be absolute or you won't get an absolute result.

This will not resolve upward directories ("foo/../bar") unless C<canonpath>
in L<File::Spec> would normally do so on your platform.  If you need them
resolved, you must call the more expensive C<realpath> method instead.

=head2 append, append_raw, append_utf8

    path("foo.txt")->append(@data);
    path("foo.txt")->append(\@data);
    path("foo.txt")->append({binmode => ":raw"}, @data);
    path("foo.txt")->append_raw(@data);
    path("foo.txt")->append_utf8(@data);

Appends data to a file.  The file is locked with C<flock> prior to writing.  An
optional hash reference may be used to pass options.  The only option is
C<binmode>, which is passed to C<binmode()> on the handle used for writing.

C<append_raw> is like C<append> with a C<binmode> of C<:unix> for fast,
unbuffered, raw write.

C<append_utf8> is like C<append> with a C<binmode> of
C<:unix:encoding(UTF-8)>.  If L<Unicode::UTF8> 0.58+ is installed, a raw
append will be done instead on the data encoded with C<Unicode::UTF8>.

=head2 basename

    $name = path("foo/bar.txt")->basename; # bar.txt

Returns the file portion or last directory portion of a path.

=head2 canonpath

    $canonical = path("foo/bar")->canonpath; # foo\bar on Windows

Returns a string with the canonical format of the path name for
the platform.  In particular, this means directory separators
will be C<\> on Windows.

=head2 child

    $file = path("/tmp")->child("foo.txt"); # "/tmp/foo.txt"
    $file = path("/tmp")->child(@parts);

Returns a new C<Path::Tiny> object relative to the original.  Works
like C<catfile> or C<catdir> from File::Spec, but without caring about
file or directories.

=head2 children

    @paths = path("/tmp")->children;
    @paths = path("/tmp")->children( qr/\.txt$/ );

Returns a list of C<Path::Tiny> objects for all files and directories
within a directory.  Excludes "." and ".." automatically.

If an optional C<qr//> argument is provided, it only returns objects for child
names that match the given regular expression.  Only the base name is used
for matching:

    @paths = path("/tmp")->children( qr/^foo/ );
    # matches like the glob /tmp/foo*

=head2 copy

    path("/tmp/foo.txt")->copy("/tmp/bar.txt");

Copies a file using L<File::Copy>'s C<copy> function.

=head2 digest

    $obj = path("/tmp/foo.txt")->digest;        # SHA-256
    $obj = path("/tmp/foo.txt")->digest("MD5"); # user-selected

Returns a hexadecimal digest for a file.  Any arguments are passed to the
constructor for L<Digest> to select an algorithm.  If no arguments are given,
the default is SHA-256.

=head2 dirname

    $name = path("/tmp/foo.txt")->dirname; # "/tmp/"

Returns the directory name portion of the path.  This is roughly
equivalent to what L<File::Spec> would give from C<splitpath> and thus
usually has the trailing slash. If that's not desired, stringify directories
or call C<parent> on files.

=head2 exists, is_file, is_dir

    if ( path("/tmp")->exists ) { ... }
    if ( path("/tmp")->is_file ) { ... }
    if ( path("/tmp")->is_dir ) { ... }

Just like C<-e>, C<-f> or C<-d>.  This means the file or directory actually has to
exist on the filesystem.  Until then, it's just a path.

=head2 filehandle

    $fh = path("/tmp/foo.txt")->filehandle($mode, $binmode);

Returns an open file handle.  The C<$mode> argument must be a Perl-style
read/write mode string ("<" ,">", "<<", etc.).  If a C<$binmode>
is given, it is set during the C<open> call.

See C<openr>, C<openw>, C<openrw>, and C<opena> for sugar.

=head2 is_absolute, is_relative

    if ( path("/tmp")->is_absolute ) { ... }
    if ( path("/tmp")->is_relative ) { ... }

Booleans for whether the path appears absolute or relative.

=head2 iterator

    $iter = path("/tmp")->iterator( \%options );

Returns a code reference that walks a directory lazily.  Each invocation
returns a C<Path::Tiny> object or undef when the iterator is exhausted.

    $iter = path("/tmp")->iterator;
    while ( $path = $iter->() ) {
        ...
    }

The current and parent directory entries ("." and "..") will not
be included.

If the C<recurse> option is true, the iterator will walk the directory
recursively, breadth-first.  If the C<follow_symlinks> option is also true,
directory links will be followed recursively.  There is no protection against
loops when following links.

For a more powerful, recursive iterator with built-in loop avoidance, see
L<Path::Iterator::Rule>.

=head2 lines, lines_raw, lines_utf8

    @contents = path("/tmp/foo.txt")->lines;
    @contents = path("/tmp/foo.txt")->lines(\%options);
    @contents = path("/tmp/foo.txt")->lines_raw;
    @contents = path("/tmp/foo.txt")->lines_utf8;

    @contents = path("/tmp/foo.txt")->lines( { chomp => 1, count => 4 } );

Returns a list of lines from a file.  Optionally takes a hash-reference of
options.  Valid options are C<binmode>, C<count> and C<chomp>.  If C<binmode>
is provided, it will be set on the handle prior to reading.  If C<count> is
provided, up to that many lines will be returned. If C<chomp> is set, lines
will be chomped before being returned.

Because the return is a list, C<lines> in scalar context will return the number
of lines (and throw away the data).

    $number_of_lines = path("/tmp/foo.txt")->lines;

C<lines_raw> is like C<lines> with a C<binmode> of C<:raw>.  We use C<:raw>
instead of C<:unix> so PerlIO buffering can manage reading by line.

C<lines_utf8> is like C<lines> with a C<binmode> of
C<:raw:encoding(UTF-8)>.  If L<Unicode::UTF8> 0.58+ is installed, a raw
UTF-8 slurp will be done and then the lines will be split.  This is
actually faster than relying on C<:encoding(UTF-8)>, though a bit memory
intensive.  If memory use is a concern, consider C<openr_utf8> and
iterating directly on the handle.

=head2 mkpath

    path("foo/bar/baz")->mkpath;
    path("foo/bar/baz")->mkpath( \%options );

Like calling C<make_path> from L<File::Path>.  An optional hash reference
is passed through to C<make_path>.  Errors will be trapped and an exception
thrown.  Returns the list of directories created or an empty list if
the directories already exist, just like C<make_path>.

=head2 move

    path("foo.txt")->move("bar.txt");

Just like C<rename>.

=head2 openr, openw, openrw, opena

    $fh = path("foo.txt")->openr($binmode);  # read
    $fh = path("foo.txt")->openr_raw;
    $fh = path("foo.txt")->openr_utf8;

    $fh = path("foo.txt")->openw($binmode);  # write
    $fh = path("foo.txt")->openw_raw;
    $fh = path("foo.txt")->openw_utf8;

    $fh = path("foo.txt")->opena($binmode);  # append
    $fh = path("foo.txt")->opena_raw;
    $fh = path("foo.txt")->opena_utf8;

    $fh = path("foo.txt")->openrw($binmode); # read/write
    $fh = path("foo.txt")->openrw_raw;
    $fh = path("foo.txt")->openrw_utf8;

Returns a file handle opened in the specified mode.  The C<openr> style methods
take a single C<binmode> argument.  All of the C<open*> methods have
C<open*_raw> and C<open*_utf8> equivalents that use C<:raw> and
C<:raw:encoding(UTF-8)>, respectively.

=head2 parent

    $parent = path("foo/bar/baz")->parent; # foo/bar
    $parent = path("foo/wibble.txt")->parent; # foo

    $parent = path("foo/bar/baz")->parent(2); # foo

Returns a C<Path::Tiny> object corresponding to the parent directory of the
original directory or file. An optional positive integer argument is the number
of parent directories upwards to return.  C<parent> by itself is equivalent to
C<parent(1)>.

=head2 realpath

    $real = path("/baz/foo/../bar")->realpath;
    $real = path("foo/../bar")->realpath;

Returns a new C<Path::Tiny> object with all symbolic links and upward directory
parts resolved using L<Cwd>'s C<realpath>.  Compared to C<absolute>, this is
more expensive as it must actually consult the filesystem.

=head2 relative

    $rel = path("/tmp/foo/bar")->relative("/tmp"); # foo/bar

Returns a C<Path::Tiny> object with a relative path name.
Given the trickiness of this, it's a thin wrapper around
C<< File::Spec->abs2rel() >>.

=head2 remove

    path("foo.txt")->remove;

B<Note: as of 0.012, remove only works on files>.

This is just like C<unlink>, except if the path does not exist, it returns
false rather than throwing an exception.

=head2 remove_tree

    # directory
    path("foo/bar/baz")->remove_tree;
    path("foo/bar/baz")->remove_tree( \%options );
    path("foo/bar/baz")->remove_tree( { safe => 0 } ); # force remove

Like calling C<remove_tree> from L<File::Path>, but defaults to C<safe> mode.
An optional hash reference is passed through to C<remove_tree>.  Errors will be
trapped and an exception thrown.  Returns the number of directories deleted,
just like C<remove_tree>.

If you want to remove a directory only if it is empty, use the built-in
C<rmdir> function instead.

    rmdir path("foo/bar/baz/");

=head2 slurp, slurp_raw, slurp_utf8

    $data = path("foo.txt")->slurp;
    $data = path("foo.txt")->slurp( {binmode => ":raw"} );
    $data = path("foo.txt")->slurp_raw;
    $data = path("foo.txt")->slurp_utf8;

Reads file contents into a scalar.  Takes an optional hash reference may be
used to pass options.  The only option is C<binmode>, which is passed to
C<binmode()> on the handle used for reading.

C<slurp_raw> is like C<slurp> with a C<binmode> of C<:unix> for
a fast, unbuffered, raw read.

C<slurp_utf8> is like C<slurp> with a C<binmode> of
C<:unix:encoding(UTF-8)>.  If L<Unicode::UTF8> 0.58+ is installed, a raw
slurp will be done instead and the result decoded with C<Unicode::UTF8>.
This is just as strict and is roughly an order of magnitude faster than
using C<:encoding(UTF-8)>.

=head2 spew, spew_raw, spew_utf8

    path("foo.txt")->spew(@data);
    path("foo.txt")->spew(\@data);
    path("foo.txt")->spew({binmode => ":raw"}, @data);
    path("foo.txt")->spew_raw(@data);
    path("foo.txt")->spew_utf8(@data);

Writes data to a file atomically.  The file is written to a temporary file in
the same directory, then renamed over the original.  An optional hash reference
may be used to pass options.  The only option is C<binmode>, which is passed to
C<binmode()> on the handle used for writing.

C<spew_raw> is like C<spew> with a C<binmode> of C<:unix> for a fast,
unbuffered, raw write.

C<spew_utf8> is like C<spew> with a C<binmode> of C<:unix:encoding(UTF-8)>.
If L<Unicode::UTF8> 0.58+ is installed, a raw spew will be done instead on
the data encoded with C<Unicode::UTF8>.

=head2 stat, lstat

    $stat = path("foo.txt")->stat;
    $stat = path("/some/symlink")->lstat;

Like calling C<stat> or C<lstat> from L<File::stat>.

=head2 stringify

    $path = path("foo.txt");
    say $path->stringify; # same as "$path"

Returns a string representation of the path.  Unlike C<canonpath>, this method
returns the path standardized with Unix-style C</> directory separators.

=head2 touch

    path("foo.txt")->touch;
    path("foo.txt")->touch($epoch_secs);

Like the Unix C<touch> utility.  Creates the file if it doesn't exist, or else
changes the modification and access times to the current time.  If the first
argument is the epoch seconds then it will be used.

Returns the path object so it can be easily chained with spew:

    path("foo.txt")->touch->spew( $content );

=head2 touchpath

    path("bar/baz/foo.txt")->touchpath;

Combines C<mkpath> and C<touch>.  Creates the parent directory if it doesn't exist,
before touching the file.  Returns the path object like C<touch> does.

=head2 volume

    $vol = path("/tmp/foo.txt")->volume;

Returns the volume portion of the path.  This is equivalent
equivalent to what L<File::Spec> would give from C<splitpath> and thus
usually is the empty string on Unix-like operating systems.

=for Pod::Coverage openr_utf8 opena_utf8 openw_utf8 openrw_utf8
openr_raw opena_raw openw_raw openrw_raw
DOES

=head1 CAVEATS

=head2 utf8 vs UTF-8

All the C<*_utf8> methods use C<:encoding(UTF-8)> -- either as
C<:unix:encoding(UTF-8)> (unbuffered) or C<:raw:encoding(UTF-8)> (buffered) --
which is strict against the Unicode spec and disallows illegal Unicode
codepoints or UTF-8 sequences.

Unfortunately, C<:encoding(UTF-8)> is very, very slow.  If you install
L<Unicode::UTF8> 0.58 or later, that module will be used by some C<*_utf8>
methods to encode or decode data after a raw, binary input/output operation,
which is much faster.

If you need the performance and can accept the security risk,
C<< slurp({binmode => ":unix:utf8"}) >> will be faster than C<:unix:encoding(UTF-8)>
(but not as fast as C<Unicode::UTF8>).

Note that the C<*_utf8> methods read in B<raw> mode.  There is no CRLF
translation on Windows.  If you must have CRLF translation, use the regular
input/output methods with an appropriate binmode:

  $path->spew_utf8($data);                            # raw
  $path->spew({binmode => ":encoding(UTF-8)"}, $data; # LF -> CRLF

Consider L<PerlIO::utf8_strict> for a faster L<PerlIO> layer alternative to
C<:encoding(UTF-8)>, though it does not appear to be as fast as the
C<Unicode::UTF8> approach.

=head2 Default IO layers and the open pragma

If you have Perl 5.10 or later, file input/output methods (C<slurp>, C<spew>,
etc.) and high-level handle opening methods ( C<openr>, C<openw>, etc. but not
C<filehandle>) respect default encodings set by the C<-C> switch or lexical
L<open> settings of the caller.  For UTF-8, this is almost certainly slower
than using the dedicated C<_utf8> methods if you have L<Unicode::UTF8>.

=head1 TYPE CONSTRAINTS AND COERCION

A standard L<MooseX::Types> library is available at
L<MooseX::Types::Path::Tiny>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

These are other file/path utilities, which may offer a different feature
set than C<Path::Tiny>.

=over 4

=item *

L<File::Fu>

=item *

L<IO::All>

=item *

L<Path::Class>

=back

These iterators may be slightly faster than the recursive iterator in
C<Path::Tiny>:

=over 4

=item *

L<Path::Iterator::Rule>

=item *

L<File::Next>

=back

There are probably comparable, non-Tiny tools.  Let me know if you want me to
add a module to the list.

=for :stopwords cpan testmatrix url annocpan anno bugtracker rt cpants kwalitee diff irc mailto metadata placeholders metacpan

=head1 SUPPORT

=head2 Bugs / Feature Requests

Please report any bugs or feature requests through the issue tracker
at L<https://github.com/dagolden/path-tiny/issues>.
You will be notified automatically of any progress on your issue.

=head2 Source Code

This is open source software.  The code repository is available for
public review and contribution under the terms of the license.

L<https://github.com/dagolden/path-tiny>

  git clone git://github.com/dagolden/path-tiny.git

=head1 AUTHOR

David Golden <dagolden@cpan.org>

=head1 CONTRIBUTORS

=over 4

=item *

Chris Williams <bingos@cpan.org>

=item *

David Steinbrunner <dsteinbrunner@pobox.com>

=item *

Gabor Szabo <szabgab@cpan.org>

=item *

George Hartzell <hartzell@cpan.org>

=item *

Goro Fuji <gfuji@cpan.org>

=item *

Karen Etheridge <ether@cpan.org>

=item *

Keedi Kim <keedi@cpan.org>

=item *

Michael G. Schwern <mschwern@cpan.org>

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

This software is Copyright (c) 2013 by David Golden.

This is free software, licensed under:

  The Apache License, Version 2.0, January 2004

